config/README.md, before:

# Configuration

To configure the `MB_Pipeline` metabarcoding workflow, modify the configuration
file `config.yaml` and input file list `reads.tsv` in this folder with your
desired options and the paths to your input files and reference databases.


## Input file table

Sample names and paths to the input files for the pipeline should be listed in
`reads.tsv` in tab-separated format, with the following fields:

 * `sample` - Short identifier the sample (alphanumeric and underscore only)
 * `lib` (optional) - If there is more than one read file/library for a given sample, disambiguate them here, e.g. as libraries `1`, `2`, ...
 * `fwd` - Path to forward read file, relative to Snakemake working directory. Absolute paths are not recommended.
 * `rev` - Path to reverse read file if reads are paired-end; leave blank if reads are single-end

Other columns in the TSV file will be ignored.


## Config file structure

Pipeline parameters are specified in the `config.yaml` file in this folder.

Paths in the config file are relative to the working directory that Snakemake
is run from; alternatively, absolute paths can be specified but are not
recommended.


### Path to input file table

```yaml
reads_table: config/reads.tsv
```


### Paired- or single-end reads
If paired end reads are used, specify this at the `paired` key. This key
accepts only `true` or `false`.

```yaml
paired: true
```


### Adapter Trimming

Adapter trimming options passed to
[Cutadapt](https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) are under
`adapter_trimming_options`.

The 5' primer sequence (`5p`), 3' primer sequence (`3p`) and minimum number of
overlapping bases to be trimmed (`min_overlap`) are specified with keywords.

Other Cutadapt options can be specified with their command line flags under
`others_common`, the same way one would usually specify them in a Cutadapt
command.

```yaml
adapter_trimming_options:
  5p: "CCNGAYATRGCNTTTYCCNCG"
  3p: "TANACYTCNGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA"
  min_overlap: 23
  others_common: "--minimum-length 1"
```


### Merging paired reads

To merge the forward and reverse reads in a read pair, the `--fastq_mergepairs`
argument of the [VSEARCH](https://github.com/torognes/vsearch) tool is used;
other parameters can also be specified and will be passed verbatim to VSEARCH.

```yaml
merge_options:
  - "--fastq_allowmergestagger"
  - "--fastq_minovlen 100"
  - "--fastq_maxdiffs 15"
  - "--fastq_eeout"
```


### Quality Filtering

Quality filtering parameters will also be passed verbatim to VSEARCH.

```yaml
filter_options:
  - "--fastq_maxee 1.0"
  - "--fastq_minlen 200"
  - "--fastq_maxlen 500"
  - "--fastq_maxns 0"
  - "--fasta_width 0"
```


### Dereplication

Exactly identical sequences are removed with VSEARCH `--derep_fulllength`.


### Protein coding sequences

Protein-coding sequences (e.g. the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I marker
sequence) can be processed differently from non-coding sequences (e.g. tRNA or
rRNA markers). Instead of filtering for chimeras with UCHIME (see below),
putative pseudogenes are removed that have excessive in-frame stop codons or
where the translation does not match a HMM of the target protein.

Activate the coding sequence-specific subworkflow with:

```yaml
protein_coding: true
```

Genetic code and a HMM file of the target protein should be supplied to screen
translated sequences for pseudogenes; PCR chimeras should also be filtered out
in this step. The approach is adapted from [Porter & Hajibabaei,
2021](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-021-04180-x).

```yaml
coding:
  frame: 3 # default for the Leray fragment of mtCOI
  code: 5 # Genetic code, must not be a stopless code
  hmm: null # path to the HMM file, relative to workdir
```

Entropy ratio-based distance denoising with DnoisE (see below) is only
available for coding sequences; the reading frame must be specified.


### Denoising

Denoising is performed with Unoise ([Edgar,
2016](https://doi.org/10.1101/081257 )) implemented in
[VSEARCH](https://github.com/torognes/vsearch) by default, but DnoisE (see
below) is an option for coding sequences.

Specify either `unoise` or `dnoise` to the key `method` under `denoising`.

```yaml
denoising:
  method: 'unoise'
  alpha: 5
  minsize: 8
```

Both methods use the parameters `alpha` and `minsize`.

Parameter `alpha` controls the tradeoff between "sensitivity to small
differences against an increase in the number of bad sequences which are
wrongly predicted to be good." Higher values of `alpha` retain more sequences
(more sensitive, more bad sequences), whereas lower values retain fewer (less
sensitive, fewer bad sequences).

`minsize` is the minimum number of sequences represented by a cluster after
denoising.


#### Denoising with DnoisE

This will perform entropy-based distance denoising with
[DnoisE](https://github.com/adriantich/DnoisE/) ([Antich et al.,
2022](https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.12758)) instead of VSEARCH UNOISE.

The expected reading frame of the amplified metabarcoding fragment should be
known, based on the PCR primers used, and denote the codon position (1, 2, or
3) of the first base in the fragment.

DnoisE can calculate the entropy ratio of codon positions 2 and 3 for different
values of the denoising paramter alpha and minimum cluster size, to help in
choosing a suitable value for alpha and min cluster size. Specify the range of
alpha and minsize values to be tested:

```yaml
dnoise_opts:
  alpha_range :    # Range of alpha to test for entropy ratio diagnostics
    [1,5,10]
  minsize_range:   # Range of minsize to test for entropy ratio diagnostics
    [2,10]
```

The pipeline first runs with the default alpha and minsize values (see above),
and also produces plots of entropy ratio vs. alpha and minsize for the
specified ranges. After reviewing the plots, the user can update the desired
values for alpha and minsize under the key `denoising` and rerun the pipeline
if necessary.


### Screening for non-target sequences and artefacts

Non-target sequences (e.g. pseudogenes, non-target amplicons) and technical
artefacts (e.g. PCR chimeras) should be removed from the sequences.

Coding sequences are screened with an HMM of the target protein, and for
excessive in-frame stop codons, to remove pseudogenes (see above). This
procedure should also indirectly remove PCR chimeras.

Non-coding sequences are screened for PCR chimeras with UCHIME de-novo
implemented in VSEARCH.


### Community Table Creation

Reads are aligned to the final set of ASVs to calculate abundance per ASV per
sample.

```yaml
community_table_options:
  - "--id 0.97"
  - "--strand plus"
```


### Taxonomic classification


#### Program for phylogenetic inference

The phylogenetic tree can be built with either
[FastTree](http://www.microbesonline.org/fasttree/) or
[IQ-TREE](http://www.iqtree.org/).

```yaml
treeprog: "fasttree" # Options: fasttree, iqtree
```


#### Reference databases for taxonomic classification

There are two methods for taxonomic classification implemented so far: the
SINTAX algorithm as implemented in SINTAX (`sintax`), and an experimental
heuristic method using a two-step comparison against databases of narrower and
broader scope (`multilvl`).

More than one can be used: specify the option as a list to `class_method`:

```yaml
class_method: ["sintax", "multilvl"]
```

For `sintax` and `multilvl` methods, the database(s) should contain unaligned
reference sequences for the target gene in Fasta format, along with the
taxonomic classification in SINTAX format in the sequence header, which is
described in the VSEARCH manual:

> The reference database must contain taxonomic information in the header of
> each sequence in the form of a string starting with ";tax=" and followed by a
> comma-separated list of up to eight taxo- nomic identifiers. Each taxonomic
> identifier must start with an indication of the rank by one of the letters d
> (for domain) k (kingdom), p (phylum), c (class), o (order), f (family), g
> (genus), or s (species). The letter is followed by a colon (:) and the name
> of that rank. Commas and semicolons are not allowed in the name of the rank.
>
> Example:
> ">X80725_S000004313;tax=d:Bacteria,p:Proteobacteria,c:Gammaproteobacteria,o:Enterobacteriales,f:Enterobacteriaceae,g:Escherichia/Shigella,s:Escherichia_coli".

The database file can also be pre-formatted into UDB format with the
`--makeudb_usearch` option in VSEARCH.  For large databases, preparing a UDB
file is faster, as it avoids re-indexing every time the pipeline is run.

The paths to the reference databases are specified under the key `dbpath`,
keyed by the classification methods named above (`sintax` or `multilvl`), and
further keyed by an alias for each database; the alias should not contain
spaces or the `.` character. In the example below, the reference database for
the `sintax` classifier has alias "test":

```yaml
dbpaths: # Ref database used by all methods
  sintax:
    test:
      "testdata/db/bold_coi-5p_test.fasta"
```

The output files will contain the classification method and reference database
alias in their filenames.

The alias is necessary so that multiple reference databases can be applied in
parallel, e.g. to compare the results when using two different databases
curated in different ways. In the example below, the ASVs will be classified
with SINTAX against two different databases, named "test" and "test2":

```yaml
dbpaths:
  sintax:
    test: # Alias for first database
      "testdata/db/bold_coi-5p_test.fasta"
    test2: # Alias for second database
      "path/to/db2.fasta""
```

If the `multilvl` classifier is used, two sets of databases are applied, one
(or more) of narrower taxonomic scope for the first step, and one of broader
taxonomic scope for the second step. These are specified under the database
alias with the `narrow` and `broad` keys respectively.

```yaml
dbpaths:
  multilvl:
    test: # alias for the db set
      narrow:
        - "testdata/db/bold_coi-5p_test.fasta"
      broad:
        "testdata/db/bold_coi-5p_test.fasta"
```


#### Classification Thresholds

The cutoff scores for accepting results from the various classifiers are given
under `class_thresholds`, keyed by the classification method. `multilvl`
requires two thresholds for the `narrow` and `broad` steps.

```yaml
class_thresholds:
  sintax: 0.8
  multilvl:
    narrow: 0.90 # threshold to use with narrow DB
    broad: 0.8 # threshold for broad DB
```

Commit message:

Enable entropy ratio plots
Update paths in rules, add switch in config file

config/README.md, after:

# Configuration

To configure the `MB_Pipeline` metabarcoding workflow, modify the configuration
file `config.yaml` and input file list `reads.tsv` in this folder with your
desired options and the paths to your input files and reference databases.


## Input file table

Sample names and paths to the input files for the pipeline should be listed in
`reads.tsv` in tab-separated format, with the following fields:

 * `sample` - Short identifier the sample (alphanumeric and underscore only)
 * `lib` (optional) - If there is more than one read file/library for a given sample, disambiguate them here, e.g. as libraries `1`, `2`, ...
 * `fwd` - Path to forward read file, relative to Snakemake working directory. Absolute paths are not recommended.
 * `rev` - Path to reverse read file if reads are paired-end; leave blank if reads are single-end

Other columns in the TSV file will be ignored.


## Config file structure

Pipeline parameters are specified in the `config.yaml` file in this folder.

Paths in the config file are relative to the working directory that Snakemake
is run from; alternatively, absolute paths can be specified but are not
recommended.


### Path to input file table

```yaml
reads_table: config/reads.tsv
```


### Paired- or single-end reads
If paired end reads are used, specify this at the `paired` key. This key
accepts only `true` or `false`.

```yaml
paired: true
```


### Adapter Trimming

Adapter trimming options passed to
[Cutadapt](https://cutadapt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) are under
`adapter_trimming_options`.

The 5' primer sequence (`5p`), 3' primer sequence (`3p`) and minimum number of
overlapping bases to be trimmed (`min_overlap`) are specified with keywords.

Other Cutadapt options can be specified with their command line flags under
`others_common`, the same way one would usually specify them in a Cutadapt
command.

```yaml
adapter_trimming_options:
  5p: "CCNGAYATRGCNTTTYCCNCG"
  3p: "TANACYTCNGGRTGNCCRAARAAYCA"
  min_overlap: 23
  others_common: "--minimum-length 1"
```


### Merging paired reads

To merge the forward and reverse reads in a read pair, the `--fastq_mergepairs`
argument of the [VSEARCH](https://github.com/torognes/vsearch) tool is used;
other parameters can also be specified and will be passed verbatim to VSEARCH.

```yaml
merge_options:
  - "--fastq_allowmergestagger"
  - "--fastq_minovlen 100"
  - "--fastq_maxdiffs 15"
  - "--fastq_eeout"
```


### Quality Filtering

Quality filtering parameters will also be passed verbatim to VSEARCH.

```yaml
filter_options:
  - "--fastq_maxee 1.0"
  - "--fastq_minlen 200"
  - "--fastq_maxlen 500"
  - "--fastq_maxns 0"
  - "--fasta_width 0"
```


### Dereplication

Exactly identical sequences are removed with VSEARCH `--derep_fulllength`.


### Protein coding sequences

Protein-coding sequences (e.g. the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I marker
sequence) can be processed differently from non-coding sequences (e.g. tRNA or
rRNA markers). Instead of filtering for chimeras with UCHIME (see below),
putative pseudogenes are removed that have excessive in-frame stop codons or
where the translation does not match a HMM of the target protein.

Activate the coding sequence-specific subworkflow with:

```yaml
protein_coding: true
```

Genetic code and a HMM file of the target protein should be supplied to screen
translated sequences for pseudogenes; PCR chimeras should also be filtered out
in this step. The approach is adapted from [Porter & Hajibabaei,
2021](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-021-04180-x).

```yaml
coding:
  frame: 3 # default for the Leray fragment of mtCOI
  code: 5 # Genetic code, must not be a stopless code
  hmm: null # path to the HMM file, relative to workdir
```

Entropy ratio-based distance denoising with DnoisE (see below) is only
available for coding sequences; the reading frame must be specified.


### Denoising

Denoising is performed with Unoise ([Edgar,
2016](https://doi.org/10.1101/081257 )) implemented in
[VSEARCH](https://github.com/torognes/vsearch) by default, but DnoisE (see
below) is an option for coding sequences.

Specify either `unoise` or `dnoise` to the key `method` under `denoising`.

```yaml
denoising:
  method: 'unoise'
  alpha: 5
  minsize: 8
```

Both methods use the parameters `alpha` and `minsize`.

Parameter `alpha` controls the tradeoff between "sensitivity to small
differences against an increase in the number of bad sequences which are
wrongly predicted to be good." Higher values of `alpha` retain more sequences
(more sensitive, more bad sequences), whereas lower values retain fewer (less
sensitive, fewer bad sequences).

`minsize` is the minimum number of sequences represented by a cluster after
denoising.


#### Denoising with DnoisE

This will perform entropy-based distance denoising with
[DnoisE](https://github.com/adriantich/DnoisE/) ([Antich et al.,
2022](https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.12758)) instead of VSEARCH UNOISE.

The expected reading frame of the amplified metabarcoding fragment should be
known, based on the PCR primers used, and denote the codon position (1, 2, or
3) of the first base in the fragment.


#### Choosing alpha and minsize values by comparing entropy ratio

DnoisE can calculate the entropy ratio of codon positions 2 and 3 for different
values of the denoising paramter alpha and minimum cluster size, to help in
choosing a suitable value for alpha and min cluster size. Specify the range of
alpha and minsize values to be tested:

```yaml
test_entropy_ratio: false # true to test denoising parameter values
dnoise_opts:
  alpha_range :    # Range of alpha to test for entropy ratio diagnostics
    [1,5,10]
  minsize_range:   # Range of minsize to test for entropy ratio diagnostics
    [2,10]
```

The pipeline first runs with the default alpha and minsize values (see above),
and also produces plots of entropy ratio vs. alpha and minsize for the
specified ranges. After reviewing the plots, the user can update the desired
values for alpha and minsize under the key `denoising` and rerun the pipeline
if necessary.

This is only possible for protein-coding genes.


### Screening for non-target sequences and artefacts

Non-target sequences (e.g. pseudogenes, non-target amplicons) and technical
artefacts (e.g. PCR chimeras) should be removed from the sequences.

Coding sequences are screened with an HMM of the target protein, and for
excessive in-frame stop codons, to remove pseudogenes (see above). This
procedure should also indirectly remove PCR chimeras.

Non-coding sequences are screened for PCR chimeras with UCHIME de-novo
implemented in VSEARCH.


### Community Table Creation

Reads are aligned to the final set of ASVs to calculate abundance per ASV per
sample.

```yaml
community_table_options:
  - "--id 0.97"
  - "--strand plus"
```


### Taxonomic classification


#### Program for phylogenetic inference

The phylogenetic tree can be built with either
[FastTree](http://www.microbesonline.org/fasttree/) or
[IQ-TREE](http://www.iqtree.org/).

```yaml
treeprog: "fasttree" # Options: fasttree, iqtree
```


#### Reference databases for taxonomic classification

There are two methods for taxonomic classification implemented so far: the
SINTAX algorithm as implemented in SINTAX (`sintax`), and an experimental
heuristic method using a two-step comparison against databases of narrower and
broader scope (`multilvl`).

More than one can be used: specify the option as a list to `class_method`:

```yaml
class_method: ["sintax", "multilvl"]
```

For `sintax` and `multilvl` methods, the database(s) should contain unaligned
reference sequences for the target gene in Fasta format, along with the
taxonomic classification in SINTAX format in the sequence header, which is
described in the VSEARCH manual:

> The reference database must contain taxonomic information in the header of
> each sequence in the form of a string starting with ";tax=" and followed by a
> comma-separated list of up to eight taxo- nomic identifiers. Each taxonomic
> identifier must start with an indication of the rank by one of the letters d
> (for domain) k (kingdom), p (phylum), c (class), o (order), f (family), g
> (genus), or s (species). The letter is followed by a colon (:) and the name
> of that rank. Commas and semicolons are not allowed in the name of the rank.
>
> Example:
> ">X80725_S000004313;tax=d:Bacteria,p:Proteobacteria,c:Gammaproteobacteria,o:Enterobacteriales,f:Enterobacteriaceae,g:Escherichia/Shigella,s:Escherichia_coli".

The database file can also be pre-formatted into UDB format with the
`--makeudb_usearch` option in VSEARCH.  For large databases, preparing a UDB
file is faster, as it avoids re-indexing every time the pipeline is run.

The paths to the reference databases are specified under the key `dbpath`,
keyed by the classification methods named above (`sintax` or `multilvl`), and
further keyed by an alias for each database; the alias should not contain
spaces or the `.` character. In the example below, the reference database for
the `sintax` classifier has alias "test":

```yaml
dbpaths: # Ref database used by all methods
  sintax:
    test:
      "testdata/db/bold_coi-5p_test.fasta"
```

The output files will contain the classification method and reference database
alias in their filenames.

The alias is necessary so that multiple reference databases can be applied in
parallel, e.g. to compare the results when using two different databases
curated in different ways. In the example below, the ASVs will be classified
with SINTAX against two different databases, named "test" and "test2":

```yaml
dbpaths:
  sintax:
    test: # Alias for first database
      "testdata/db/bold_coi-5p_test.fasta"
    test2: # Alias for second database
      "path/to/db2.fasta""
```

If the `multilvl` classifier is used, two sets of databases are applied, one
(or more) of narrower taxonomic scope for the first step, and one of broader
taxonomic scope for the second step. These are specified under the database
alias with the `narrow` and `broad` keys respectively.

```yaml
dbpaths:
  multilvl:
    test: # alias for the db set
      narrow:
        - "testdata/db/bold_coi-5p_test.fasta"
      broad:
        "testdata/db/bold_coi-5p_test.fasta"
```


#### Classification Thresholds

The cutoff scores for accepting results from the various classifiers are given
under `class_thresholds`, keyed by the classification method. `multilvl`
requires two thresholds for the `narrow` and `broad` steps.

```yaml
class_thresholds:
  sintax: 0.8
  multilvl:
    narrow: 0.90 # threshold to use with narrow DB
    broad: 0.8 # threshold for broad DB
```
